Bridge Cave Photos
Tweet
Cave Photos
Black Mountain Cave Photos
Cathedral Cave Photos
Craig Y Nos Quarry Cave
Cribarth Sink Photos
Dan Yr Ogof Photos
Llygad Llwchwr Photos
Llygad Llwchwr 2 Photos
Ogof Dan Y Lleuad Wen Photos
Ogof Foel Fawr Photos
Ogof Gwynt Yr Eira Photos
Ogof Pasg Photos
Ogof Pwll Swnd Photos
Ogof Y Garimpeiros Photos
Pwll Dwfn Pothole Photos
Tunnel Cave Photos
Carmarthenshire Cave Photos
Ogof Marros Photos
Central Northern Outcrop Cave Photos
Blaen Onneu Quarry Pot Photos
Chartist Cave Photos
Ogof Ap Robert Photos
Ogof Cynnes Photos
Ogof Rhyd Sych Photos
Ogof Tarddiad Rhymney Photos
Ogof Tee and Cil Sanws Photos
Ogof Y Ci Photos
Twll Clogfaen Photos
Clydach Gorge Cave Photos
Llanelly Quarry Pot Photos
Ogof Capel Photos
Ogof Clogwyn Photos
Ogof Craig A Ffynnon Photos
Ogof Draenen Photos
Ogof Dwy Sir Photos
Ogof Nant Rhin Photos
Ogof Pont Gam Photos
Shakespeare's Cave Photos
Siambr Ddu Cave Photos
Waterfall Cave Photos
Gower Cave Photos
Tooth Cave Photos
Llangattock Cave Photos
Agen Allwedd Photos
Eglwys Faen Photos
Ogof Cnwc (Price's Dig) Photos
Ogof Daren Cilau Photos
Ogof Gwaliau Gwynion Photos
Ogof Pen Eryr Photos
Pwll Y Gwynt Photos
Pwll Y Pasg Photos
Pembrokeshire Cave Photos
Ogof Gofan Photos
Southern Outcrop Cave Photos
Lesser Garth Cave Photos
Swansea Valley Cave Photos
Cwm Dwr Quarry Cave Photos
Cwm Dwr II Photos
Ogof Ffynnon Ddu 1 (OFD 1) Photos
Ogof Ffynnon Ddu 2 (OFD 2) Photos
Ogof Yr Ardd Photos
Powell's Cave Photos
Sychryd and Hepste Cave Photos
Ogof Fawr Photos
Ogof Fechan Photos
Will's Hole Photos
Ystradfellte Cave Photos
Bridge Cave Photos
Little Neath River Cave Photos
Ogof Dan Y Rhedyn Photos
Pant Mawr Pot Photos
Porth Yr Ogof Photos
Pwll Pindar Photos
Town Drain / Arcade Cave Photos
White Lady Cave Photos
Caving Videos
Cave Maps
Major Caves of South Wales Map
South West Wales Cave Map
Carmarthenshire Cave Map
Gower Cave Map
Black Mountain West Cave Map
Black Mountain Central Cave Map
Black Mountain East Cave Map
Swansea Valley Cave Map
Ystradfellte Cave Map
Sychryd + Hepste Cave Map
Central Northern Outcrop Cave Map
Llangattock Cave Map
Clydach Gorge Cave Map
Surveys
Dan Yr Ogof Interactive Survey
Dan Yr Ogof Surface Features
Dan Yr Ogof Historical Photos
Bridge Cave
↓ Further information
Near the Entrance - Bridge Cave
Entrance Streamway - Bridge Cave
Main Streamway - Bridge Cave
Main Streamway - Bridge Cave
Main Streamway - Bridge Cave
Formations near the sump - Bridge Cave
21 photo slideshow
Caves in this area
Show next cave
Overview
Bridge Cave starts as a low crawl, but after a short distance having passed through a boulder choke opens out into an impressive section of streamway. This then quickly reduces in size and reaching a sump less than 300m from the entrance.
Length
311m
Altitude
300m
Grid
SN 91170 13990
History
The cave was first recorded by T.A.J. Braithwaite in Caves and Caving Volume 1 1938. In 1947 the South Wales Caving Club dug through the boulder choke 45m into the cave to discover 150 of main stream passage leading to sump 1. In January 1967 members of the University of Bristol Spelaeological Society dived sump 1 to discover
Little Neath River Cave
.
Location
The cave is located in the Nedd Fechan valley beside a bridge near the start of the Sarn Helen road. Visit Blaen Nedd Isaf Farm first to obtain permission. A parking area is available beside Bridge Cave. A stile by the parking area just before the bridge over the Afon Nedd Fechan leads into a wooded depression where on the right a wide low arched entrance can be found at the base.
Ystradfellte Google map showing the location of Bridge Cave and other caves in the area.
Location map - click marker to show entrance photo
Access
Permission to visit the cave must be obtained from Blaen Nedd Isaf farm, where a 1 pound per person trespass fee will be charged.
Description
The entrance passage to Bridge Cave starts as a low dry stoop and crawl in a small phreatic passage often with cobbles on the floor until the boulder choke is reached. In this first section of cave there are a couple of oxbow passages giving an option of routes, but all rejoin the main route. The boulder choke is entered between large boulders on the left and as the stream is reached the boulders become smaller. There has been movement in this choke previously on the side where the stream is reached and although work has been carried out to stabilise this choke, care should be taken when going through to meet the streamway at the other side. This meandering streamway leads after 20m to the large and impressive Main Passage. On the right is West Passage which leads to a choke and an inlet from one of the high water flow sinks in the bed of the Nedd Fechan. The large river flows across the whole width of the Main Passage and heads down towards The Rock Bridge, a climb up on the right hand wall just before The Bridge gives access to it. Leading from the ledge beside The Bridge is a low passage that can be followed for about 20m before it becomes too small to progress. Below in the Main Passage the roof height becomes lower until it reaches the 18m long sump that links through to Little Neath River Cave.
This sump is not freediveable.
In the main passage before The Bridge is reached, a high level inlet passage on the right can be followed for about 30m before a duck and a series of sumps are encountered.
Tackle
No tackle is required.
References
Cambrian Cave Registry for Bridge Cave
UBSS Second Report on the Little Neath River Cave - includes Bridge Cave information and survey
Caves of South Wales
| Tim Stratford | ISBN: 1-871890-03-9 | Published by Cordee
Selected Caves of Britain and Ireland
| Des Marshall - Donald Rust | ISBN: 1-871890-43-8 | Cordee
The Caves the Little Neath Valley
| Tony Oldham
Warnings
In wet weather a large portion of the Nedd Fechan flows through the cave, the water is deep and fast flowing.
The boulder choke should be treated with care as you pass through it.
Disclaimer
The photographs and information of this page has been provided to help cavers planning trips. Caving can be a dangerous activity, if you are interested in exploring caves please join a caving club so you can enjoy a safe introduction to this sport. Local caving clubs are listed on the
links page
or you can
visit the 'New To Caving' website
for more options.
If you feel that any of the information is incorrect or should be updated please contact us.
Cave Conservation Code
Cave with care and thought for the environment.
Disturb nothing whether living or geological.
Avoid touching formations.
Keep to marked routes and never cross conservation tapes.
Take nothing but photographs.
Do not pollute the cave, leave nothing behind.
british-caving.org.uk
Download leaflet
© Trilobyte 2008-2018
