Ogof Marros Cave Photos and Description
Tweet
Cave Photos
Black Mountain Cave Photos
Cathedral Cave Photos
Craig Y Nos Quarry Cave
Cribarth Sink Photos
Dan Yr Ogof Photos
Llygad Llwchwr Photos
Llygad Llwchwr 2 Photos
Ogof Dan Y Lleuad Wen Photos
Ogof Foel Fawr Photos
Ogof Gwynt Yr Eira Photos
Ogof Pasg Photos
Ogof Pwll Swnd Photos
Ogof Y Garimpeiros Photos
Pwll Dwfn Pothole Photos
Tunnel Cave Photos
Carmarthenshire Cave Photos
Ogof Marros Photos
Central Northern Outcrop Cave Photos
Blaen Onneu Quarry Pot Photos
Chartist Cave Photos
Ogof Ap Robert Photos
Ogof Cynnes Photos
Ogof Rhyd Sych Photos
Ogof Tarddiad Rhymney Photos
Ogof Tee and Cil Sanws Photos
Ogof Y Ci Photos
Twll Clogfaen Photos
Clydach Gorge Cave Photos
Llanelly Quarry Pot Photos
Ogof Capel Photos
Ogof Clogwyn Photos
Ogof Craig A Ffynnon Photos
Ogof Draenen Photos
Ogof Dwy Sir Photos
Ogof Nant Rhin Photos
Ogof Pont Gam Photos
Shakespeare's Cave Photos
Siambr Ddu Cave Photos
Waterfall Cave Photos
Gower Cave Photos
Tooth Cave Photos
Llangattock Cave Photos
Agen Allwedd Photos
Eglwys Faen Photos
Ogof Cnwc (Price's Dig) Photos
Ogof Daren Cilau Photos
Ogof Gwaliau Gwynion Photos
Ogof Pen Eryr Photos
Pwll Y Gwynt Photos
Pwll Y Pasg Photos
Pembrokeshire Cave Photos
Ogof Gofan Photos
Southern Outcrop Cave Photos
Lesser Garth Cave Photos
Swansea Valley Cave Photos
Cwm Dwr Quarry Cave Photos
Cwm Dwr II Photos
Ogof Ffynnon Ddu 1 (OFD 1) Photos
Ogof Ffynnon Ddu 2 (OFD 2) Photos
Ogof Yr Ardd Photos
Powell's Cave Photos
Sychryd and Hepste Cave Photos
Ogof Fawr Photos
Ogof Fechan Photos
Will's Hole Photos
Ystradfellte Cave Photos
Bridge Cave Photos
Little Neath River Cave Photos
Ogof Dan Y Rhedyn Photos
Pant Mawr Pot Photos
Porth Yr Ogof Photos
Pwll Pindar Photos
Town Drain / Arcade Cave Photos
White Lady Cave Photos
Caving Videos
Cave Maps
Major Caves of South Wales Map
South West Wales Cave Map
Carmarthenshire Cave Map
Gower Cave Map
Black Mountain West Cave Map
Black Mountain Central Cave Map
Black Mountain East Cave Map
Swansea Valley Cave Map
Ystradfellte Cave Map
Sychryd + Hepste Cave Map
Central Northern Outcrop Cave Map
Llangattock Cave Map
Clydach Gorge Cave Map
Surveys
Dan Yr Ogof Interactive Survey
Dan Yr Ogof Surface Features
Dan Yr Ogof Historical Photos
Ogof Marros
↓ Further information
Heading back to dig Long in the Tooth Choke
A break from digging - Ogof Marros
Main Streamway - Ogof Marros
Main Streamway - Ogof Marros
Main Streamway - Ogof Marros
Three Tier Rifts - Ogof Marros
11 photo slideshow
Caves in this area
Show next cave
Overview
Ogof Marros is located at the site of a significant sink where a stream runs down off the Old Red Sandstone of the Marros mountain and sinks over a wide area as it meets the lower limestone beds at Coggan's Cliff. The water sinks at the base of the 15 m high limestone cliffs and then follows and underground course for over two kilometers until it resurges at the Morfa Brychan rising at the coast.
Length
300 m +
Altitude
105 m
Grid
SN 21402 09516
History
This potential of this site was recognised by local caver Phil Knight and digging commenced. A team of ten people mostly from South Wales Caving Club, including Phil Knight, Fred Cook, Emily Ivens, Storm Morris, Ashley Pursglove, Antonia Freem, Andy Freem, Claire Vivian, Duncan Hornby and Michael Perryman then formed to pursue this great lead. Over a summer of digging in 2015 they eventually broke through into over 300 metres of fine cave passage. The exploration can be viewed in the video on the embedded link below. The exploration of this site continues by the team.
Location
Ogof Marros is located by a large sink at Coggan's Cliff in the Greenbridge valley. From the Pendine to Amroth Road just uphill from Greenbridge, the cave is approached via a bridleway that passes through a livestock farm and then follows a small stream that once fed Greenbridge Cave. Crossing a field to the wooded area in the bottom of the valley brings you to this massive wooded depression where the cave is located. An obvious ramp of digging spoil above the main sink near the centre of the massive cliff marks the entrance.
Carmarthenshire Google map showing the location of Ogof Marros and other caves in the area.
Location map - click marker to show entrance photo
Access
The cave is located on private land and is a site of current exploration by the original discoverers. The cave is currently gated and bona fide cavers who wish to visit the cave should contact the team on the following e-mail address to make arrangements
ogofmarros@email.com
Description
A low entrance crawl enters a small descending chamber after a couple of metres, where a short shaft is found in the floor. A four metre climb down leads immediately to a constriction named "Fred's Despair" where a flat out "letterbox" squeeze leads to a drop down into roomier passage beyond. A largely stooping passage is then followed for about 20 m until low crawls on the right lead into the well decorated but low "Antonia's Grotto". The grotto is formed over the top of a settled boulder choke and has no ways on and being taped to prevent damage to the formations it contains. To the left of the grotto is "Claire's Chamber", a 3 m climb down the edge of the choke where the rumble of the stream can be heard rushing through the boulders below. At the base of this climb down, the route follows the left side of the choke and enters "Three Man Chamber". From here the original route was once a low wet crawl under the boulders to reach the streamway, but now a climb on the left through boulders has been engineered to give drier and all weather access. The route through the boulders emerges in the "Wildest Dreams" streamway, where a well formed passage with many delicate formations requires slow and thoughtful progress, there is much to enjoy on this section of low decorated passage. After 25 m the passage lowers to form "Shrimp Crawl" a still decorated passage that passes through a small decorated chamber to reach the first boulder chamber a central point leading via several routes into the Master Cave. To the left a route leads to "Crystal Carpet Chamber" this is very delicately decorated on the walls, roof and the crystal carpet formation on the floor. This oxbow passage is taped off at a viewing point to protect it. To the right is another passage taped off to protect the formations. A short climb up leads to a taped viewpoint into the passage, that can also be viewed later from the other end in the upstream Master Cave. The central two routes lead via climbs down boulders to meet the Main Streamway. This is now joined by several other inlets and flows quite strongly in wet weather. Heading upstream are 20 m of passage over 8 m in diameter adorned with short stal formations in the roof. To the right you can see the other end of the passage mentioned earlier. The passage then splits into three, with the main route ahead, where in a pool lives "Jimmy The Trout", please take care where you place your feet as you pass the pool. The passage progresses to a low wide area where an inlet can be followed upstream, heading towards surface sinks. The low area can be followed to the left down an oxbow taking some of the water back down to the main stream passage. A further inlet stream is passed just before the start of the large Master Cave.
From the first boulder chamber a 5 m climb down the boulders on the left leads to the lower main streamway which starts lofty and boulder floored but quickly reduces to a low gravel floor as a downstream blockage "Long in the Tooth Choke" is reached. Just before the choke are a couple of low crawls on the left, which lead into a multi-level set of passages the "Three Tier Rifts" these are well decorated in parts and also lead to chokes.
Tackle
No tackle required.
Video
References
Cambrian Cave Registry for Ogof Marros
Cambrian Cave Registry for Ogof Marros Sink
Cambrian Caving Council Newsletter 48
Descent
| No.248 p22-24 (2016)
South Wales Caving Club Newsletter
| No.132 p10-25 (2016)
Warnings
There are low wet sections in this cave that flood to the roof in wet weather - only visit in dry settled weather.
As with many recently discovered caves, rocks are loose and are liable to move or fall, particularly ones in the chokes.
Disclaimer
The photographs and information of this page has been provided to help cavers planning trips. Caving can be a dangerous activity, if you are interested in exploring caves please join a caving club so you can enjoy a safe introduction to this sport. Local caving clubs are listed on the
links page
or you can
visit the 'New To Caving' website
for more options.
If you feel that any of the information is incorrect or should be updated please contact us.
Cave Conservation Code
Cave with care and thought for the environment.
Disturb nothing whether living or geological.
Avoid touching formations.
Keep to marked routes and never cross conservation tapes.
Take nothing but photographs.
Do not pollute the cave, leave nothing behind.
british-caving.org.uk
Download leaflet
© Trilobyte 2008-2018
